# Chapter 004 - Understanding Ownership

## Intro
* Ownership is the most important feature of the Rust language. Moreover, it's this feature that distincts it from other programming languages.
* It's also safe to say that such feature has deep implications for the rest of the language.
* __It's ownership that allows Rust to make its famous safety guarantees without the need of a Garbage Collector (GC).__
* __The concept of Ownership is tied to other important concepts:__
    * Borrowing
    * Slices
    * Data layout in Memory

## What is Ownership?
* __A set of rules that govern how a Rust program manages memory.__
* Common approaches used by popular programming languages:
    * Garbage collection keep looking for unused variables in the memory while the programming is running (Java, Python, JavaScript).
    * Us, the programmers, must explicitly allocate and deallocate (free) the memory (C, C++).
* __Ok... But how does Ownership manages the memory? Such set of rules is checked by the compiler at compile time. If at least one of such rules is not followed, then the program won't compile and, thus, won't run.__
* Pay attention to the fact that the Ownership system does not slow down the execution of Rust programs.
* __It does take some time to get used to it, since it's a new way of programming. But as you get used to it, you will be able to write code that is more safe and performant.__

## The Stack and The Heap
* Both are region of the memory available for your program to use at runtime.
* However, there are a couple differences when it comes to how these regions of memory work and are structured.
* __Stack__
    * __Stores values inside itself following a LIFO (Last-In First-Out) policy.__
    * __All data stored inside the stack must have known and fixed size at compile time.__
    * __Have a well-defined structure due to its policy regarding insertion and deletion of elements.__
* __Heap__
    * __Stores values in a less-organized way.__
    * __The process goes as follows: The memory allocator finds an empty spot inside the heap that is big enough for the data that you want to store, marks it as 'being used' and returns the address of such location in memory (pointer).__
    * __Because the pointer to the heap is a known, fixed size, you can store the pointer on the stack, but when you want the actual data, you must follow the pointer.__
        * How can I know the size of a pointer? Does the size change if it points to different types of data in the heap?
* Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap because the allocator never has to search for a place to store new data; that location is always at the top of the stack.
* Comparatively, allocating space on the heap requires more work because the allocator must first find a big enough space to hold the data and then perform bookkeeping to prepare for the next allocation.
* Accessing data in the heap is slower than accessing data on the stack because you have to follow a pointer to get there.
* __A processor can do its job better if it works on data that’s close to other data (as it is on the stack) rather than farther away (as it can be on the heap).__
* __When your code calls a function, the values passed into the function (including, potentially, pointers to data on the heap) and the function’s local variables get pushed onto the stack. When the function is over, those values get popped off the stack.__
* __The main purpose of Ownership is to manage Heap data:__
    * __Keeping track of what parts of code are using what data on the Heap.__
    * __Minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the Heap.__
    * __Cleaning up unused data on the Heap so you don’t run out of space.__

## Ownership Rules
* __In Rust, there are 3 of such rules that must be followed no matter what.__
* __Such rules are:__
    1) Each value in Rust has an owner.
    2) There can only be one (1) owner at a time.
    3) When the owner goes out of scope, the value is dropped.

## Variable Scope
* __A scope is the range within a program for which an item is valid.__
* __The variable is valid from the point at which it’s declared until the end of the current scope.__
* __At this point, the relationship between scopes and when variables are valid is similar to that in other programming languages.__

## The ```String``` type in Rust
* To better illustrate the concepts of the Ownership rules, we need to work with more complex data types.
* __Until now, we've worked with data types whose size are known and fixed at compile time. Values of such types can be easily stored inside the stack and popped off the stack when their scope is over.__
* __Moreover, values of such types can be quickly and trivially copied to make a new, independent instance if another part of code needs to use the same value in a different scope.__
* __However, we want to look at data that is stored on the heap and explore how Rust knows when to clean up that data.__
* We’ve already seen string literals, where a string value is hardcoded into our program. String literals are convenient, but they aren’t suitable for every situation in which we may want to use text (keep in mind that string literal are immutable and not every string value can be known when we write our code).
* For these situations, Rust has a second string type called ```String```. __This type manages data allocated on the heap and as such is able to store an amount of text that is unknown to us at compile time.__
* We can create a value of type ```String``` from a string literal using the following method:
```rust
let s = String::from("Hello, World!");
```
* Moreover, the ```String``` type can be mutated, while string literals cannot:
```rust
let mut s = String::from("Hello");
s.push_str(", World!"); // This method appends a string literal value to a String value.
println!("{}", s);
```

## Memory and Allocation
* In the case of a string literal, we know the contents at compile time, so the text is hardcoded directly into the final executable. This is why string literals are fast and efficient. Such properties come from the fact that string literals are immutable.
* With the ```String``` type, in order to support a mutable, growable piece of text, we need to allocate an amount of memory on the heap, unknown at compile time, to hold the contents. This means:
    * The memory must be requested from the memory allocator at runtime.
    * We need a way of returning this memory to the allocator when we’re done with our ```String```.
* __How previous programming languages have dealt with the second action of returning pieces of memory back to the allocator?__
    * __In languages with a garbage collector (GC), the GC keeps track of and cleans up memory that isn’t being used anymore, and we don’t need to think about it. In most languages without a GC, it’s our responsibility to identify when memory is no longer being used and to call code to explicitly free it, just as we did to request it. Doing this correctly has historically been a difficult programming problem. If we forget, we’ll waste memory. If we do it too early, we’ll have an invalid variable. If we do it twice, that’s a bug too. We need to pair exactly one ```allocate``` with exactly one ```free```.__
    * __Rust takes a different path: the memory is automatically returned once the variable that owns it goes out of scope.__
    * Code snippet example:
    ```rust
    {
        let s = String::from("hello"); // s is valid from this point forward
        // do stuff with s
    }// this scope is now over, and s is no longer valid
    ```
    * When a variable goes out of scope, Rust calls a special function for us. This function is called ```drop```, and it’s where the author of ```String``` can put the code to return the memory. Rust calls ```drop``` automatically at the closing curly bracket.

## Variable and Data interacting with Move
* The code snippet below will work exactly as we think it would work in other programming languages: Bind the value 5 to ```x```. Then, make a copy of the value in ```x``` and bind it to ```y```. We now have two variables, ```x``` and ```y```, and both equal 5. This is indeed what is happening, because integers are simple values with a known, fixed size, and these two 5 values are pushed onto the stack.
```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;
println!("x = {} and  y = {}", x, y);
```
* Now, let's do the same but dealing with the ```String``` type:
```rust
let s1 = String::from("Hello, World!");
let s2 = s1;
```
* __A String is made up of three parts: a pointer to the memory that holds the contents of the string (such content is stored inside the heap), a length, and a capacity. This group of data is stored on the stack.__
* __The length is how much memory, in bytes, the contents of the ```String``` are currently using.__
* __The capacity is the total amount of memory, in bytes, that the ```String``` has received from the allocator. The difference between length and capacity matters.__
* __IMPORTANT: When we assign ```s1``` to ```s2```, the ```String``` data is copied, meaning we copy the pointer, the length, and the capacity that are on the stack. We do not copy the data on the heap that the pointer refers to.__
* Rust does not copy the data on the heap because it would be very expensive in terms of runtime performance if the data on the heap were large.
* To ensure memory safety, after the line ```let s2 = s1;```, Rust considers ```s1``` as no longer valid. Therefore, Rust doesn’t need to free anything when ```s1``` goes out of scope. It essentialy performs a move from ```s1``` to ```s2```.
* In addition, there’s a design choice that’s implied by this: Rust will never automatically create “deep” copies of your data. Therefore, any automatic copying can be assumed to be inexpensive in terms of runtime performance.

## Variables and Data Interacting with Clone
* If we do want to deeply copy the heap data of the ```String```, not just the stack data, we can use a common method called ```clone```.
```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1.clone();

println!("s1 = {}, s2 = {}", s1, s2);
``` 
* __Here, both the stack data and the heap data do get copied.__
* When you see a call to such method, you know that some arbitrary code is being executed and that code may be expensive.

## Stack-Only Data: Copy
* There's something that we need to cover yet. The code snippet below works and is also valid:
```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;
println!("x = {}, y = {}", x, y);
```
* Types such as integers (and others) that have a known size at compile time are stored entirely on the stack. Therefore, copies of the actual values are quick to make.
* That means there’s no reason we would want to prevent ```x``` from being valid after we create the variable ```y```. In other words, there’s no difference between deep and shallow copying here, so calling clone wouldn’t do anything different from the usual shallow copying, and we can leave it out.
* __Rust has a special annotation called the ```Copy``` trait that we can place on types that are stored on the stack. If a type implements the ```Copy``` trait, variables that use it do not move, but rather are trivially copied, making them still valid after assignment to another variable.__
* Rust won’t let us annotate a type with ```Copy``` if the type, or any of its parts, has implemented the ```Drop``` trait. If the type needs something special to happen when the value goes out of scope and we add the ```Copy``` annotation to that type, we’ll get a compile-time error.
* To find out which types implement the ```Copy``` train, you can check the documentation for the given type to be sure, but as a general rule, any group of simple scalar values can implement ```Copy```, and nothing that requires allocation or is some form of resource can implement ```Copy```.
* Rust types that implement the ```Copy``` trait:
    * All integer types.
    * All floating-point types.
    * The boolean type.
    * The character type.
    * Tuples, if they only contain types that also implement ```Copy```. For example, ```(i32, i32)``` implements ```Copy```, but ```(i32, String)``` does not (because the ```String``` type does not implement the ```Copy``` trait).

## Ownership and Functions
* The mechanics of passing a value to a function are similar to those when assigning a value to a variable. Passing a variable to a function will move or copy, just as assignment does.

## Return Values and Scope
* Returning values can also transfer ownership.
* The ownership of a variable follows the same pattern every time: assigning a value to another variable moves it.
* When a variable that includes data on the heap goes out of scope, the value will be cleaned up by ```drop``` unless ownership of the data has been moved to another variable.

## References and Borrowing
* The issue with the tuple code in Listing 4-5 is that we have to return the ```String``` to the calling function so we can still use the ```String``` after the call to ```calculate_length```, because the ```String``` was moved into ```calculate_length```.
* __Instead, we can provide a reference to the String value. A reference is like a pointer in that it’s an address we can follow to access the data stored at that address; that data is owned by some other variable.__ 
* __Unlike a pointer, a reference is guaranteed to point to a valid value of a particular type for the life of that reference.__
* Example of Code Snippet that makes use of references:
```rust
fn main() {
    let s1 = String::from("hello");

    let len = calculate_length(&s1);

    println!("The length of '{}' is {}.", s1, len);
}

fn calculate_length(s: &String) -> usize {
    s.len()
}
```
* __First, notice that all the tuple code in the variable declaration and the function return value is gone. Second, note that we pass ```&s1``` into ```calculate_length``` and, in its definition, we take ```&String``` rather than ```String```. These ampersands represent references, and they allow you to refer to some value without taking ownership of it.__
* __DOUBT: Are references stored in the stack or in the heap?__
* Note: The opposite of referencing by using ```&``` is dereferencing, which is accomplished with the dereference operator, ```*```.
* __The ```&s1``` syntax lets us create a reference that refers to the value of ```s1``` but does not own it. Because it does not own it, the value it points to will not be dropped when the reference stops being used.__
* __Likewise, the signature of the function uses ```&``` to indicate that the type of the parameter ```s``` is a reference.__ The scope in which the variable ```s``` is valid is the same as any function parameter’s scope, but the value pointed to by the reference is not dropped when ```s``` stops being used, because ```s``` doesn’t have ownership of it. 
* __When functions have references as parameters instead of the actual values, we won’t need to return the values in order to give back ownership, because we never had ownership in the first place.__
* __We call the action of creating a reference borrowing.__
* __Just as variables are immutable by default, so are references. We’re not allowed to modify something we have a reference to.__

## Mutable References
* If we want to modify a borrowed value using references, then we need to use a mutable reference.
* Here's how we can change the code to deal with mutable references:
    1. First we change ```s``` to be ```mut``` because if we don't do this, we will not be able to borrow ```s``` as mutable, since it's not declared as mutable.
    2. Then we create a mutable reference with ```&mut s``` where we call the ```change``` function.
    3. Update the function signature to accept a mutable reference with ```some_string: &mut String```.
* This makes it very clear that the ```change``` function will mutate the value it borrows.
* Following the instructions above, we have the following code snippet:
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut s = String::from("hello");

    change(&mut s);
}

fn change(some_string: &mut String) {
    some_string.push_str(", world");
}
```
* __Mutable references have one big restriction: If you have a mutable reference to a value, you can have no other references to that value simultaneously.__
* The restriction preventing multiple mutable references to the same data at the same time allows for mutation but in a very controlled fashion.
* It’s something that new Rustaceans struggle with because most languages let you mutate whenever you’d like.
* __The benefit of having this restriction is that Rust can prevent data races at compile time. A data race is similar to a race condition and happens when these three behaviors occur:__
    1. __Two or more pointers access the same data at the same time.__
    2. __At least one of the pointers is being used to write to the data.__
    3. __There’s no mechanism being used to synchronize access to the data.__
* __Data races cause undefined behavior and can be difficult to diagnose and fix when you’re trying to track them down at runtime; Rust prevents this problem by refusing to compile code with data races!__
* IMPORTANT: We also cannot have a mutable reference while we have an immutable one to the same value.
* __Users of an immutable reference don’t expect the value to suddenly change out from under them! (Thus, we are not allowed to have simultaneous mutable and immutable references to the same data).__ However, multiple immutable references are allowed because no one who is just reading the data has the ability to affect anyone else’s reading of the data.
* Note that a reference’s scope starts from where it is introduced and continues through the last time that reference is used. For instance, this code will compile because the last usage of the immutable references, the ```println!```, occurs before the mutable reference is introduced:
```rust
let mut s = String::from("hello");

let r1 = &s; // no problem
let r2 = &s; // no problem
println!("{} and {}", r1, r2);
// variables r1 and r2 will not be used after this point

let r3 = &mut s; // no problem
println!("{}", r3);
```
* On the other hand, the code below won't compile because we introduced a mutable reference while the immutable references are still being used:
```rust
let mut s = String::from("hello");

let r1 = &s; // no problem
let r2 = &s; // no problem
let r3 = &mut s; // BIG PROBLEM

println!("{}, {}, and {}", r1, r2, r3);
```

## Dangling References
* In languages with pointers, it’s easy to erroneously create a dangling pointer — a pointer that references a location in memory that may have been given to someone else—by freeing some memory while preserving a pointer to that memory.
* __In Rust, by contrast, the compiler guarantees that references will never be dangling references: if you have a reference to some data, the compiler will ensure that the data will not go out of scope before the reference to the data does.__

## The Rules of References
* Basically, we have two rules when it comes down to the usage of references in Rust:
    1. At any given time, you can have either one mutable reference or any number of immutable references.
    2. References must always be valid.

## The Slice Type
* It lets you reference a contiguous sequence of elements in a collection rather than the whole collection.
* A slice works in a very similar way as a reference. It does not have the ownership over data stored inside the memory.
* If you need to iterate through a string, in an element by element fashion, to check whether an element is a space, it's a good idea to convert the string to an array of bytes by using the ```as_bytes``` method.
* Then, we can create an iterator over this array of bytes. To do that, we can use the ```iter``` method with the ```enumerate``` method. The first method returns each element in a collection and the second one wraps the result of ```iter``` and returns each element as part of a tuple instead. The first element of the tuple returned from ```enumerate``` is the index, and the second element is a reference to the element.
* Since the ```enumerate``` method returns a tuple, we can use patterns to destructure that tuple. In the ```for``` loop, we specify a pattern that has ```i``` for the index in the tuple and ```&item``` for the single byte in the tuple. Because we get a reference to the element from ```.iter().enumerate()```, we use ```&``` in the pattern.
* Inside the ```for``` loop, we search for the byte that represents the space by using the byte literal syntax.
* If we find a space, we return the position. Otherwise, we return the length of the whole string.
* Example of Rust code that returns the index of the end of the first word:
```rust
fn first_word(s: &String) -> usize {
    let bytes = s.as_bytes();

    for (i, &item) in bytes.iter().enumerate() {
        if item == b' ' {
            return i;
        }
    }

    s.len()
}
```

## String Slices
* A string slice is a reference to part of a ```String```, and it looks like this:
```rust
let s = String::from("hello world");

let hello = &s[0..5];
let world = &s[6..11];
```
* Rather than a reference to the entire ```String```, hello (which is a slice) is a reference to a portion of the ```String```.
* We create slices using a range within brackets by specifying ```[starting_index..ending_index]``` along with the name of the variable that points to a ```String``` value in memory. It's important to mention the fact that:
    * ```starting_index``` is inclusive.
    * ```ending_index``` is not inclusive.
* __Internally, the slice data structure stores the starting position (a pointer to that specific element in the heap portion of the memory) and the length of the slice, which corresponds to ```ending_index - starting_index```.__
* __Particularities of the Rust ```..``` syntax:__
    * __These two slices represent the same thing:__
    ```rust
    let s = String::from("hello");

    let slice = &s[0..2];
    let slice = &s[..2];
    ```
    * __As well as these two slices:__
    ```rust
    let s = String::from("hello");

    let len = s.len();

    let slice = &s[3..len];
    let slice = &s[3..];
    ```
    * __Finally, if you want a slice that works as a reference to a whole ```String``` value, you can write the following:__
    ```rust
    let s = String::from("hello");

    let len = s.len();

    let slice = &s[0..len];
    let slice = &s[..];
    ```
* __IMPORTANT: In Rust, the type that represents a string slice is ```&str``` (Remember that we've said that a string slice is just a reference to a portion/sequence of a ```String``` value).__
* The following Rust code snippet is a function that receives a reference to a String value (```&String```) and returns the first word inside the such value. In other words, it returns a string slice (```&str```):
```rust
fn first_word(s: &String) -> &str {
    let bytes = s.as_bytes();

    for (i, &item) in bytes.iter().enumerate() {
        if item == b' ' {
            return &s[0..i];
        }
    }

    &s[..]
}
```

## String Literals as Slices
* Recall that we talked about string literals being stored inside the binary. Now that we know about slices, we can properly understand string literals:
```rust
let s = "Hello, world!";
```
* Here, the variable ```s``` is of type ```&str```. It’s a slice pointing to that specific point of the binary. This is also why string literals are immutable.
* __IMPORTANT: Defining a function to take a string slice instead of a reference to a String makes our API more general and useful without losing any functionality. If we have a string slice, we can pass that directly. If we have a ```String```, we can pass a slice of the ```String``` or a reference to the ```String```.__

## Other Slices
* There’s a more general slice type too.
* Consider the array shown below:
```rust
let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```
* Just as we might want to refer to part of a string, we might want to refer to part of an array. We’d do so like this:
```rust
let a = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let slice = &a[1..3];

assert_eq!(slice, &[2, 3]);
```
* __This slice has the type ```&[i32]```. It works the same way as string slices do, by storing a reference to the first element and a length.__
