# Chapter 003 - Common Programming Concepts

## Variables and Mutability
* __By default, in Rust, variables are immutable. This is a good design decision because it favors safety and concurrency.__
* However, nothing stops you from making your variables mutable.
* You can make a variable mutable by adding the ```mut``` keyword in front of the variable name. Adding such keyword also conveys intent to future readers of the code by indicating that other parts of the code will be changing this variable's value.
* Example of Rust code snippet:
```rs
fn main(){
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {x}");
    x = 13;
    println!("The new value of x is: {x}");
}
```
* __Ultimately, deciding whether to use mutability or not is up to you and depends on what you think is clearest in that particular situation.__


### Constants
* Constants are basically values that bounded to a name and cannot change later in time.
* However, there are a few differences between constants and variables:
    * First, constants aren't immutable by default. They are ALWAYS immutable. This means that you cannot use the ```mut``` keyword in a constant declaration.
    * Second, to declare a constant, you must use the ```const``` keyword.
    * Third, when you declare a constant, you must put a type annotation. Otherwise, you'll receive an error.
    * Fourth, constants may be set only to a constant expression, not the result of a value that could only be computed at runtime. __It's a good idea to take a look at the Rust reference to see what's considered a constant expression and what is not. The compiler is able to evaluate a limited set of operations at compile time.__
* Rust’s naming convention for constants is to use all uppercase with underscores between words.


### Shadowing
* In Rust, you can declare a new variable with the same name as a previous variable. __This means that you can re-declare a variable in this language without receiving any errors.__
* __Rustaceans say that the first variable is shadowed by the second, which means that the second variable is what the compiler will see when you use the name of the variable.__
* In effect, the second variable overshadows the first, taking any uses of the variable name to itself until either it itself is shadowed or the scope ends. We can shadow a variable by using the same variable’s name and repeating the use of the let keyword as follows:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5; // 5;

    let x = x + 1; // 6

    {
        let x = 2 * x; // 12
        println!("The value of x in the inner scope is: {x}"); //12

    }

    println!("The value of x is: {x}"); // 6
}
```
* __Shadowing is different from marking a variable as ```mut``` because we’ll get a compile-time error if we accidentally try to reassign to this variable without using the ```let``` keyword. By using ```let```, we can perform a few transformations on a value but have the variable be immutable after those transformations have been completed.__
* __The other difference between mut and shadowing is that because we’re effectively creating a new variable when we use the let keyword again, we can change the type of the value but reuse the same name. For example, say our program asks a user to show how many spaces they want between some text by inputting space characters, and then we want to store that input as a number:__
```rust
let spaces = "      ";
let spaces = spaces.len();
```
* By using the ```let``` keyword, we are basically creating a new variable, which allows us to do some "tricks". If we don't use such keyword, we cannot perform such "tricks".


## Data Types
* In Rust, every value has a certain data type associated to it.
* There are 2 types of data that we must keep in mind while working with Rust: __scalar__ and __compound.__
* Remember that Rust is a statically typed language, __which means that it must know the types of all variables at compile time.__
* The compiler can usually infer what type we want to use based on the value and how we use it. This is a process called __type inference.__

### Scalar Types
* A scalar type represents a single value.
* __In Rust, the following types are considered to be scalar types: integer numbers, floating-point numbers, booleans, characters.__
* __To deal with integer numbers, Rust recomends using the ```i32``` type.__
* __In Rust, signed integer numbers are stored using two’s complement representation. It might be a good idea to take a look into how such representation works.__
* Additionally, the ```isize``` and ```usize``` types depend on the architecture of the computer your program is running on, which is commonly denoted as “arch”: 64 bits if you’re on a 64-bit architecture and 32 bits if you’re on a 32-bit architecture. Also, such types are the types used to index some sort of collection (arrays and strings, for example).
* __How Rust deals with Integer Overflow:__
    * Let’s say you have a variable of type ```u8``` that can hold values between 0 and 255. If you try to change the variable to a value outside that range, such as 256, integer overflow will occur, which can result in one of two behaviors. When you’re compiling in debug mode, Rust includes checks for integer overflow that cause your program to panic at runtime if this behavior occurs. Rust uses the term panicking when a program exits with an error; we’ll discuss panics in more depth in the “Unrecoverable Errors with panic!” section in Chapter 9.
    * When you’re compiling in release mode with the --release flag, Rust does not include checks for integer overflow that cause panics. Instead, if overflow occurs, Rust performs two’s complement wrapping. In short, values greater than the maximum value the type can hold “wrap around” to the minimum of the values the type can hold. In the case of a u8, the value 256 becomes 0, the value 257 becomes 1, and so on. The program won’t panic, but the variable will have a value that probably isn’t what you were expecting it to have. Relying on integer overflow’s wrapping behavior is considered an error.
* __To deal with floating-point numbers, Rust recomends using the ```f64``` type. It's roughly the same speed as ```f32``` but it's capable of more precision.__
* Remember that all floating-point types (```f32``` and ```f64```) are signed.
* In Rust, floating-point numbers are represented according to the IEEE-754 standard:
    * ```f32```: single-precision floating-point number.
    * ```f64```: double-precision floating-point number.
* __IMPORTANT: Integer division truncates toward zero to the nearest integer.__
* In Rust, booleans are represented by the type ```bool```. Such type has only two possible values (```true``` and ```false```). Booleans are 1 byte (8 bits) in size.
* Rust’s ```char``` type is the language’s most primitive alphabetic type.
* __Note that we specify ```char``` literals with single quotes, as opposed to string literals, which use double quotes. Rust’s ```char``` type is 4 bytes (32 bits) in size and represents a Unicode Scalar Value, which means it can represent a lot more than just ASCII. Accented letters; Chinese, Japanese, and Korean characters; emoji; and zero-width spaces are all valid char values in Rust. Unicode Scalar Values range from ```U+0000``` to ```U+D7FF``` and ```U+E000``` to ```U+10FFFF``` inclusive.__

### Compound Types
* Compound types can group multiple values into one type. Rust has two primitive compound types: __tuples and arrays.__
* A __tuple__ is a general way of grouping together a number of values with a variety of types into one compound type. Tuples have a fixed length: once declared, they cannot grow or shrink in size. Example of a tuple declared in Rust:
```rs
let tup: (i32, f64, u8) = (500, 6.4, 1);
```
* To get the individual values out of a tuple, we can use pattern matching to destructure a tuple value.
* We can also access a tuple element directly by using a period (```.```) followed by the index (a number of type ```usize``` or ```isize```) of the value we want to access.
* __IMPORTANT: The tuple without any values has a special name, unit. This value and its corresponding type are both written ```()``` and represent an empty value or an empty return type. Expressions implicitly return the unit value if they don’t return any other value.__
* An __array__ is another way to have a collection of multiple values. Unlike a tuple, every element of an array must have the same type. Unlike arrays in some other languages, arrays in Rust have a fixed length.
