# Chapter 001 - Getting Started

## What is ```rustup```?
* __It's a command line tool for managing Rust versions and associated tools.__
* You'll need an internet connection for the download.
* The ```rustup``` tool install the latest stable version of Rust.

## Checking the installed version of Rust
* You can discover that by running the following command: ```rustc --version```.
    * The output should be the version number, commit hash and commit date for the latest stable version that has been released, in the following format: ```rustc x.y.z (abcabcabc yyyy-mm-dd)```.
    * If you see such output, then you have installed Rust successfully!

## Updating and Uninstalling
* To update Rust to a newly released version, all you need to do is run the following command: ```rustup update```.
* To uninstall Rust and ```rustup```, run the following command: ```rustup self uninstall```.

## Local Documentation
* You can read a local copy of the documentation offline by running the following command: ```rustup doc```.
* It will open the local documentation in your browser.

## Side Note: Naming Rust files
* __The usual convention to name your Rust files is to use an underscore to separate the words, if there are more than one inside the file name.__

## Compiling and Running a Rust file by using ```rustc```
* Go to the directory where your Rust file is.
* Run the following commands:
    1. ```rustc <FILE_NAME>```
    2. ```./<FILE_NAME>```

## The ```main``` function
* __This is a special function: It's always the first code (i.e., the starting point) that runs in every executable Rust program.__

## Side Note: Sticking to a standard style across Rust projects
* If you want to do so, you can use an automatic formatter tool called ```rustfmt``` to format your code in a particular style.
* If needed, you can find more info about the ```rustfmt``` in Appendix D of "The Rust Programming Language" book.

## Side Note: More about Rust style
* Indent with 4 space, not a tab.
* To end an expression in Rust, we use the semicolon character (```;```). Most lines of Rust code end with a semicolon.

## Side Note: AOT in Rust
* __Rust is an ahead-of-time compiled language, meaning you can compile a program and give the executable to someone else, and they can run it even without having Rust installed. On the other hand, if you give someone a ```.rb```, ```.py```, or ```.js``` file, they need to have a Ruby, Python, or JavaScript implementation installed (respectively). But in those languages, you only need one command to compile and run your program. Everything is a trade-off in language design.__

## Side Note: Compiling large projects written in Rust
* __Just compiling with ```rustc``` is fine for simple programs, but as your project grows, you’ll want to manage all the options and make it easy to share your code. To do so, we'll use the Cargo tool.__

## Cargo
* Cargo is Rust's package manager and build system.
* Cargo handles a lot of tasks for you, in an automatic way, such as: __building your code, downloading the libraries your code depends on, and building those libraries.__
* As you write more complex Rust programs, you'll eventualy need to add dependencies, and if you start a project using Cargo, adding dependencies will be much easier to do.
* __Cargo comes installed with Rust if you used the official installers.__
* __To check whether Cargo is installed, all you need to do is run the following command: ```cargo --version```.

## Creating a project with Cargo
* To create a new Rust project with Cargo, all you need to do is run the following command inside a specific directory: ```cargo new <CARGO_PROJECT_NAME>```.
* Then, Cargo will create a new directory whose name will be ```CARGO_PROJECT_NAME```. It will also create a whole structure inside this folder that is the one used as a standard when writing complex Rust projects.
* Such structure (inside the generated directory) is defined as follows:
    * ```Cargo.toml``` (file)
    * ```src``` (directory)
        * ```main.rs``` (file)
    * ```.gitignore``` (file - Git files won't be generated if you run ```cargo new``` within an existing Git repository. You can override this behavior by using the command: ```cargo new --vcs=git```).
* You can see more ways of creating a Rust project with Cargo by running the following command: ```cargo new --help```.
* __Cargo expects your source files to live inside the generated ```src``` directory.__
* __The top-level project directory is just for README files, license information, configuration files and anything else not related to your code.__
* __In other words, using Cargo helps you organize your projects.__

## Side Note: Converting a Non-Cargo project to a Cargo project
* If you started a project that doesn’t use Cargo, as we did with the “Hello, world!” project, you can convert it to a project that does use Cargo. Move the project code into the ```src``` directory and create an appropriate ```Cargo.toml``` file.

## Building and Running a Cargo Project
* You can build a Cargo project by running the following command inside the Cargo project in the terminal: ```cargo build```.
* Such command creates an executable file (i.e., a binary) in ```target/debug/<CARGO_PROJECT_NAME>``` (in our case, it would be ```target/debug/hello_cargo```).
* Since the default build is a debug build, Cargo will put the binary inside a directory called ```debug```.
* To execute the binary, you can simply run the following command: ```./target/debug/<CARGO_PROJECT_NAME>```.
* __Running ```cargo build``` for the first time also causes Cargo to create a new file at the top level: ```Cargo.lock```. This file keeps track of the exact versions of dependencies in your project. This project doesn’t have dependencies, so the file is a bit sparse. You won’t ever need to change this file manually; Cargo manages its contents for you.__
* __Moreover, you can build and run your project in a single command. All you need to do is run: ```cargo run```. It will compile the code and then run the resultant executable. This is usually more convenient.__
* Notice that this time we didn’t see output indicating that Cargo was compiling the "hello_cargo" project. Cargo figured out that the files hadn’t changed, so it didn’t rebuild but just ran the binary. If you had modified your source code, Cargo would have rebuilt the project before running it.
* __Cargo also provides a command called ```cargo check```. This command quickly checks your code to make sure it compiles but doesn’t produce an executable. Why would you not want an executable? Often, ```cargo check``` is much faster than ```cargo build``` because it skips the step of producing an executable. If you’re continually checking your work while writing the code, using ```cargo check``` will speed up the process of letting you know if your project is still compiling! As such, many Rustaceans run ```cargo check``` periodically as they write their program to make sure it compiles. Then they run ```cargo build``` when they’re ready to use the executable.__

## Building for Release
* __When your project is finally ready for release, you can use ```cargo build --release``` to compile it with optimizations. This command will create an executable in ```target/release``` instead of ```target/debug.``` The optimizations make your Rust code run faster, but turning them on lengthens the time it takes for your program to compile (remember, in Computer Science, there are lots of trade-offs and, thus, you need to decide what you want to focus on).__
* __This is why there are two different profiles: one for development, when you want to rebuild quickly and often, and another for building the final program you’ll give to a user that won’t be rebuilt repeatedly and that will run as fast as possible.__
* __If you’re benchmarking your code’s running time, be sure to ```run cargo build --release``` and benchmark with the executable in ```target/release```.__

## Cargo as Convention
* In fact, to work on any existing projects, you can use the following commands to check out the code using Git, change to that project’s directory, and build:
```sh
git clone example.org/someproject
cd someproject
cargo build
```
* For more info about Cargo, check its documentation.