# Chapter 008 - Common Collections

## Intro
* Rust’s stdlib includes a number of very useful data structures called __collections__.
* __Most other data types represent one specific value, but collections can contain multiple values.__
* __The data these collections point to is stored on the heap.__
  * __The amount of data does not need to be known at compile time.__
  * __The data can grow or shrink as the program runs.__
* The three collections that are most used in Rust programs are the following:
  * Vector: Allows you to store a variable sequence of values from the same type next to each other.
  * String: Allows you to store a dynamic sequence of characters.
  * Hash Map: Allows you to store a dynamic number of pairs (key-value).

## Vector
* Vector is also known as ```Vec<T>```.
* Allows you to store more than one value in a single data structure.
* It puts all the values next to each other in memory.
* Only store values of the same type.
* The code snippet to create a new vector in Rust is the following:
```rust
let v: Vec<i32> = Vec::new();
```
* __As we've seen above, vectors are implemented using generics. This means that we have to add a type annotation here. Because we aren’t inserting any values into this vector, Rust doesn’t know what kind of elements we intend to store.__
* However, there is another common scenario: You might need create a ```Vec<T>``` with initial values and Rust will infer the type of value you want to store, so you rarely need to do this type annotation. Rust conveniently provides the ```vec!``` macro, which will create a new vector that holds the values you give it.
```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3];
```
* In the code snippet above, Rust creates a new ```Vec<i32>```. The integer type is ```i32``` because that’s the default integer type.
* Because we’ve given initial ```i32``` values, Rust can infer that the type of ```v``` is ```Vec<i32>```, and the type annotation isn’t necessary.

### Updating a Vector
* To create a vector and then add elements to it, we can use the ```push``` method:
```rust
let mut v = Vec::new();

v.push(5);
v.push(6);
v.push(7);
v.push(8);
```
* As with any variable, if we want to be able to change its value, we need to make it mutable using the ```mut``` keyword.

### Reading elements of a Vector
* There are two ways to reference a value stored in a vector: via indexing (using the square brackets notation: ```[]```) or using the ```get``` method.
* The code snippet below shows both ways of doing such a thing:
```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let third: &i32 = &v[2];
println!("The third element is {third}");

let third: Option<&i32> = v.get(2);
match third {
    Some(third) => println!("The third element is {third}"),
    None => println!("There is no third element."),
}
```
* Using ```&``` and ```[]``` gives us a reference to the element at the index value.
* When we use the ```get``` method with the index passed as an argument, we get an ```Option<&T>``` that we can use with ```match```.
* __The reason Rust provides these two ways to reference an element is so you can choose how the program behaves when you try to use an index value outside the range of existing elements.__
* Code Snippet that shows how to use both of strategies mentioned above:
```rust
let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let does_not_exist = &v[100];
let does_not_exist = v.get(100);
```
* Observations about each strategy:
  * __When we run this code, the first ```[]``` method will cause the program to panic because it references a nonexistent element. This method is best used when you want your program to crash if there’s an attempt to access an element past the end of the vector.__
  * __When the ```get``` method is passed an index that is outside the vector, it returns ```None``` without panicking. You would use this method if accessing an element beyond the range of the vector may happen occasionally under normal circumstances. Your code will then have logic to handle having either ```Some(&element)``` or ```None```.__
* Note: For example, the index could be coming from a person entering a number. If they accidentally enter a number that’s too large and the program gets a ```None``` value, you could tell the user how many items are in the current vector and give them another chance to enter a valid value. That would be more user-friendly than crashing the program due to a typo!

### Borrowing and Ownership in a Vector
* When the program has a valid reference, the borrow checker enforces the ownership and borrowing rules to ensure this reference and any other references to the contents of the vector remain valid.
* Recall the rule that states you can’t have mutable and immutable references in the same scope.
* That rule applies in the code snippet below, where we hold an immutable reference to the first element in a vector and try to add an element to the end. This program won’t work if we also try to refer to that element later in the function.
```rust
let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

let first = &v[0];

v.push(6);

println!("The first element is: {first}");
```
* __The code snippet above looks like it should work: Why should a reference to the first element care about changes at the end of the vector?__
  * __This error is due to the way vectors work: because vectors put the values next to each other in memory, adding a new element onto the end of the vector might require allocating new memory and copying the old elements to the new space, if there isn’t enough room to put all the elements next to each other where the vector is currently stored.__ 
  * __In that case, the reference to the first element would be pointing to deallocated memory. The borrowing rules prevent programs from ending up in that situation.__

### Iterating over the Values in a Vector
* To access each element in a vector in turn, we would iterate through all of the elements rather than use indices to access one at a time.
* Example #1: Using a ```for``` loop to get immutable references to each element in a vector of ```i32``` values and print them:
```rust
let v = vec![100, 32, 57];
for i in &v {
  println!("{i}"); // What would be the correct way if: println!("{}", i); or println!("{}", *i);
}
```
* Example #2: We can also iterate over mutable references to each element in a mutable vector in order to make changes to all the elements. The ```for``` loop below will add ```50``` to each element:
```rust
let mut v = vec![100, 32, 57];
for i in &mut v {
  *i += 50;
}
```
* To change the value that the mutable reference refers to, we have to use the ```*``` dereference operator to get to the value in ```i``` before we can use the ```+=``` operator.
* __Iterating over a vector, whether immutably or mutably, is safe because of the borrow checker's rules. If we attempted to insert or remove items in the ```for``` loop bodies above, we would get a compiler error similar to the one we got with the code above. The reference to the vector that the ```for``` loop holds prevents simultaneous modification of the whole vector.__

### Using an Enum to Store Multiple Types
* __Vectors can only store values that are the same type.__
* __This can be inconvenient because there are definitely use cases for needing to store a list of items of different types.__
* __Fortunately, the variants of an enum are defined under the same enum type, so when we need one type to represent elements of different types, we can define and use an enum!__
* For example, say we want to get values from a row in a spreadsheet in which some of the columns in the row contain integers, some floating-point numbers, and some strings. We can define an enum whose variants will hold the different value types, and all the enum variants will be considered the same type: that of the enum.
* The Code Snippet below shows how to do this:
```rust
enum SpreadsheetCell {
  Int(i32),
  Float(f64),
  Text(String),
}

let row = vec![
  SpreadsheetCell::Int(3),
  SpreadsheetCell::Text(String::from("blue")),
  SpreadsheetCell::Float(10.12),
];
```
* Rust needs to know what types will be in the vector at compile time so it knows exactly how much memory on the heap will be needed to store each element. We must also be explicit about what types are allowed in this vector. If Rust allowed a vector to hold any type, there would be a chance that one or more of the types would cause errors with the operations performed on the elements of the vector.
* If you don’t know the exhaustive set of types a program will get at runtime to store in a vector, the enum technique won’t work. Instead, you can use a trait object.

### Dropping a Vector Drops Its Elements
* __Like any other ```struct```, a vector is freed when it goes out of scope.__
```rust
{
  let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4];
  // do stuff with v
} // <- v goes out of scope and is freed here
```
* __When the vector gets dropped, all of its contents are also dropped, meaning the integers it holds will be cleaned up.__
* __The borrow checker ensures that any references to contents of a vector are only used while the vector itself is valid.__

## String
* Here, we'll take a deeper dive in the world of strings.
* New Rustaceans commonly get stuck on strings for a combination of three reasons:
  1. Rust’s propensity for exposing possible errors.
  2. Strings being a more complicated data structure than many programmers give them credit for.
  3. UTF-8.
* __We discuss strings in the context of collections because strings are implemented as a collection of bytes, plus some methods to provide useful functionality when those bytes are interpreted as text.__
*  __We’ll also discuss the ways in which ```String``` is different from the other collections, namely how indexing into a ```String``` is complicated by the differences between how people and computers interpret ```String``` data.__

### What is String?
* Rust has only one string type in the core language, which is the string slice ```str```.
* The string slice type is usually seen in its borrowed form: ```&str```.
* __String slices are references to some UTF-8 encoded string data elsewhere.__
* __String literals, for example, are stored in the program’s binary and are therefore string slices.__
* The ```String``` type, which is provided by Rust’s standard library rather than coded into the core language, is a growable, mutable, owned, UTF-8 encoded string type.
* When Rustaceans refer to “strings” in Rust, they might be referring to either the ```String``` or the string slice ```&str``` types.

### Creating a New String
* Many of the same operations available with ```Vec<T>``` are available with ```String``` as well, because ```String``` is actually implemented as a wrapper around a vector of bytes with some extra guarantees, restrictions, and capabilities.
* To create a new and empty ```String``` in Rust, we can use the following:
```rust
let mut s = String::new();
```
* Often, we’ll have some initial data that we want to start the string with. For that, we use the ```to_string``` method, which is available on any type that implements the ```Display``` trait, as string literals do.
* The code snippet below shows how to do this:
```rust
let data = "initial contents";

let s = data.to_string();

let s = "initial contents".to_string(); // the method also works on a literal directly.
```
* There's also another way of doing the same thing:
```rust
let s = String::from("initial contents");
```
* __The last 2 code snippets create a ```String``` from the string literal ```"initial contents"```.__
* __In other words, ```String::from``` and ```to_string``` do the same thing, so which you choose is a matter of style and readability.__

### Updating a String
* A ```String``` can grow in size and its contents can change, just like the contents of a ```Vec<T>```, if you push more data into it.
* In addition, you can conveniently use the ```+``` operator or the ```format!``` macro to concatenate ```String``` values.
* __We can grow a ```String``` by using the ```push_str``` method to append a string slice. The ```push_str``` method takes a string slice because we don’t necessarily want to take ownership of the parameter:__
```rust
let mut s = String::from("foo");
s.push_str("bar");
```
* The code snippet below only compiles without errors because the ```push_str``` method takes a string slice (which is a reference) as its parameter:
```rust
let mut s1 = String::from("foo");
let s2 = "bar";
s1.push_str(s2);
println!("s2 is {s2}");
```
* __There's also the ```push``` method that takes a single character as a parameter and adds it to the ```String```:__
```rust
let mut s = String::from("lo");
s.push('l'); // lol
```

### Concatenation with the ```+``` Operator or the ```format!``` Macro
* There are scenarios where you might want to perform concatenation of two ```String``` values.
* In such scenarios, you might want to use the ```+``` operator.
* You can do such a thing following the pattern showed in the code snippet below:
```rust
let s1 = String::from("Hello, ");
let s2 = String::from("world!");
let s3 = s1 + &s2; // Note s1 has been moved here and can no longer be used.
```
* As you might have already guessed, the string ```s3``` will contain the value ```Hello, world!```.
* __The reason ```s1``` is no longer valid after the addition, and the reason we used a reference to ```s2```, has to do with the signature of the method that’s called when we use the ```+``` operator.__
* __The ```+``` operator uses the ```add``` method, whose signature looks something like this:__
```rust
fn add(self, s: &str) -> String {
  // ...
}
```
* Here, we’ve substituted in concrete types, which is what happens when we call this method with ```String``` values.
* The signature of the ```add``` method gives us some clues in order to understand how the ```+``` operator actually works behind the scenes:
  1. First, ```s2``` has an ```&```, meaning that we’re adding a reference of the second string to the first string. This is because of the ```s``` parameter in the ```add``` function: we can only add a ```&str``` to a ```String```. We can’t add two ```String``` values together.
  2. However, the type of ```&s2``` is ```&String```, not ```&str```, as specified in the second parameter to ```add```. So how does the code snippet above compile?
  3. The reason we’re able to use ```&s2``` in the call to ```add``` is that the compiler can coerce the ```&String``` argument into a ```&str```. When we call the ```add``` method, Rust uses a deref coercion, which here turns ```&s2``` into ```&s2[..]```.
  4. Because ```add``` does not take ownership of the ```s``` parameter, ```s2``` will still be a valid ```String``` after this operation.
  5. Second, we can see in the signature that ```add``` takes ownership of ```self```, because ```self``` does not have an ```&```. This means that ```s1``` in the code snippet above will be moved into the ```add``` call and will no longer be valid after that.
  6. In short, the last statement actually takes ownership of ```s1```, appends a copy of the contents of ```s2```, and then returns ownership of the result.
* For more complicated string combining, we can instead use the ```format!``` macro:
  ```rust
  let s1 = String::from("tic");
  let s2 = String::from("tac");
  let s3 = String::from("toe");

  let s = format!("{s1}-{s2}-{s3}");
  ```
  * The ```format!``` macro works like ```println!```, but instead of printing the output to the screen, it returns a ```String``` with the contents.
  * This code using ```format!``` is very easy to read, and the code generated by the ```format!``` macro uses references so that this call doesn’t take ownership of any of its parameters.

### Indexing into Strings
* __In many other programming languages, accessing individual characters in a string by referencing them by index is a valid and common operation.__
* __However, if you try to access parts of a ```String``` using indexing syntax in Rust, you’ll get an error.__
* In other words, if you try to compile the code snippet below, you'll receive an error:
```rust
let s1 = String::from("hello");
let h = s1[0];
```
* __In short, the reason for such error is very simple: Rust strings don’t support indexing.__

### Internal Representation of Strings in Memory
* In Rust, the ```String``` type is a wrapper over the ```Vec<u8>``` type.
```rust
let hello = String::from("Hola");
```
* In this case, ```len``` will be 4, which means the vector storing the string ```“Hola”``` is 4 bytes long.
* __Each of these letters takes 1 byte when encoded in UTF-8. In other words, in this scenario, a 1:1 mapping from unicode character-to-byte happens in this case. But it's not always like this.__
* The following line, however, may surprise you:
```rust
let hello = String::from("Здравствуйте");
```
* At the first look, you might think that, in this case, ```len``` will be 12. However, this is not the case.
* __Rust’s answer is 24: that’s the number of bytes it takes to encode ```“Здравствуйте”``` in UTF-8, because each Unicode scalar value in that string takes 2 bytes of storage.__
* __In other words, in this scenario, a 1:2 mapping from unicode character-to-byte happens in this case.__
* __IMPORTANT: Therefore, an index into the string’s bytes will not always correlate to a valid Unicode scalar value.__
* __Finally, Rust has the following approach: Avoid returning an unexpected value and causing bugs that might not be discovered immediately. Therefore, Rust doesn’t compile this code at all and prevents misunderstandings early in the development process.__

### Bytes and Scalar Values and Grapheme Clusters! Oh My!
* __Another point about UTF-8 is that there are actually three relevant ways to look at strings from Rust’s perspective:__
  * __bytes__
  * __scalar values__
  * __grapheme clusters (the closest thing to what we would call letters)__
* If we look at the Hindi word ```“नमस्ते”``` written in the Devanagari script, it is stored as a vector of ```u8``` values that looks like this:
```rust
[224, 164, 168, 224, 164, 174, 224, 164, 184, 224, 165, 141, 224, 164, 164, 224, 165, 135]
```
* From the vector above, we see that its length is 18. Which means that it needs 18 bytes to store the data of such ```String``` value in memory.
* If we look at them as Unicode scalar values, which are what Rust’s ```char``` type is, those bytes look like this:
```rust
['न', 'म', 'स', '्', 'त', 'े']
```
* From the vector above, we that its length is 6. This means that it needs 6 Unicode scalar values (or 6 values of the ```char``` type) to represent such ```String``` value in memory.
* Finally, if we look at them as grapheme clusters, we’d get what a person would call the four letters that make up the Hindi word:
```rust
["न", "म", "स्", "ते"]
```
* __Conclusion: Rust provides different ways of interpreting the raw string data that computers store so that each program can choose the interpretation it needs, no matter what human language the data is in.__
* __Side Note: A final reason Rust doesn’t allow us to index into a ```String``` to get a character is that indexing operations are expected to always take constant time: O(1). But it isn’t possible to guarantee that performance with a ```String```, because Rust would have to walk through the contents from the beginning to the index to determine how many valid characters there were.__

### Slicing Strings
* Indexing into a string is often a bad idea because it’s not clear what the return type of the string-indexing operation should be: a byte value, a character, a grapheme cluster, or a string slice.
* If you really need to use indices to create string slices, therefore, Rust asks you to be more specific.
* __Rather than indexing using ```[]``` with a single number, you can use ```[]``` with a range to create a string slice containing particular bytes:__
```rust
let hello = "Здравствуйте";
let s = &hello[0..4];
```
* __Here, ```s``` will be a value of type ```&str``` that contains the first 4 bytes of the string. Earlier, we mentioned that each of these characters was 2 bytes, which means ```s``` will be ```"Зд"```.__

### TL;DR about indexing string values in Rust
* __In short, when indexing any string value in Rust, we are referring to the number of bytes.__

### Methods for Iterating Over Strings
* __Very Important: The best way to operate on pieces of strings is to be explicit about whether you want characters or bytes.__
  * For individual Unicode scalar values, use the ```chars``` method
  ```rust
  for c in "Зд".chars() {
    println!("{c}");
  }
  // З
  // д
  ```
  * Alternatively, the ```bytes``` method returns each raw byte, which might be appropriate depending on your domain:
  ```rust
  for b in "Зд".bytes() {
    println!("{b}");
  }
  // 208
  // 151
  // 208
  // 180
  ```
* __Very Important: But be sure to remember that valid Unicode scalar values may be made up of more than 1 byte.__
* __Side Note: Getting grapheme clusters from strings as with the Devanagari script is complex, so this functionality is not provided by the standard library. There might be certain crates available that meet your needs.__
* Conclusion: Rust has chosen to make the correct handling of ```String``` data the default behavior for all Rust programs, which means programmers have to put more thought into handling UTF-8 data upfront. This trade-off exposes more of the complexity of strings than is apparent in other programming languages, but it prevents you from having to handle errors involving non-ASCII characters later in your development life cycle.

## Hash Map
* __The type ```HashMap<K, V>``` stores a mapping of keys of type ```K``` to values of type ```V``` using a hashing function, which determines how it places these keys and values into memory.__
* __Hash Maps are useful when you want to look up data not by using an index, as you can with vectors, but by using a key that can be of any type.__
* __As always, if you want more info about how the ```HashMap``` type is implemented and its methods, make sure to check the standard library documentation for more information.__

### Creating a New Hash Map
* One way to create an empty hash map is using ```new```.
* To add new elements, we can use the ```insert``` method.
* The code snippet below shows how to use such methods in the appropriate way:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);
```
* Of our three common collections, this one is the least often used, so it’s not included in the features brought into scope automatically in the prelude.
* Hash maps also have less support from the standard library. There’s no built-in macro to construct them, for example.
* __Important: Just like vectors, hash maps store their data on the heap. This ```HashMap``` has keys of type ```String``` and values of type ```i32```. Like vectors, hash maps are homogeneous: all of the keys must have the same type as each other, and all of the values must have the same type.__

### Accessing Values in a Hash Map
* We can get a value out of the hash map by providing its associated key to the ```get``` method:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

let team_name = String::from("Blue");
let score = scores.get(&team_name).copied().unwrap_or(0);
```
* __Walkthrough the code snippet above:__
  1. __The variable ```score``` will have the value that’s associated with the ```Blue``` team, and the result will be 10.__
  2. __The ```get``` method returns an ```Option<&V>```. This means that if there’s no value for that key in the hash map, then the ```get``` method will return ```None```.__
  3. __It handles the ```Option``` type by calling the ```copied``` method to get an ```Option<i32>``` rather than an ```Option<&i32>```.__
  4. __Finally, it calls the ```unwrap_or``` method to set ```score``` to zero if scores doesn't have an entry for the key.__

### Iterating through the key-value pairs of a Hash Map
* We can iterate over each key/value pair in a hash map in a similar manner as we do with vectors:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

for (key, value) in &scores {
    println!("{key}: {value}");
}
```
* __The code snippet above will print each pair in an arbitrary order.__

### Hash Maps and Ownership
* __For types that implement the ```Copy``` trait, like ```i32```, the values are copied into the hash map.__
* __For owned values like ```String```, the values will be moved and the hash map will be the owner of those values.__
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let field_name = String::from("Favorite color");
let field_value = String::from("Blue");

let mut map = HashMap::new();
map.insert(field_name, field_value);
// field_name and field_value are invalid at this point, try using them and
// see what compiler error you get!
```
* __As you might have already correctly guessed: We aren’t able to use the variables ```field_name``` and ```field_value``` after they’ve been moved into the hash map with the call to the ```insert``` method.__
* __However, it's possible to insert references to values into the hash map. The values won’t be moved into the hash map. The values that the references point to must be valid for at least as long as the hash map is valid. Such a thing is guaranteed by providing lifetimes for the references.__

### Updating a Hash Map
* Although the number of key-value pairs inside a HashMap is growable, each unique key can only have one value associated with it at a time.
* __When you want to change the data in a hash map, you have to decide how to handle the case when a key already has a value assigned:__
  1. __You could replace the old value with the new value, completely disregarding the old value.__
  2. __You could keep the old value and ignore the new value, only adding the new value if the key doesn’t already have a value.__
  3. __You could combine the old value and the new value.__
* __Let's take a look at how each of these scenarios could be implemented:__
  1. __Overwriting a Value__
    * If we insert a key and a value into a hash map and then insert that same key with a different value, the value associated with that key will be replaced.
    * To do such a thing, all we need to do is call the ```insert``` method without implementing any kind of treatment.
    ```rust
    use std::collections::HashMap;

    let mut scores = HashMap::new();

    scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
    scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 25);

    println!("{:?}", scores);
    ```
  2. __Adding a Key and Value Only If a Key Isn’t Present__
    * It’s common to check whether a particular key already exists in the hash map with a value then take the following actions: if the key does exist in the hash map, the existing value should remain the way it is. If the key doesn’t exist, insert it and a value for it.
    * Hash maps have a method called ```entry``` that takes the key you want to check as a parameter.
    * Such method returns an enum called ```Entry``` that represents a value that might or might not exist. Let’s say we want to check whether the key for the ```"Yellow"``` string value has a value associated with it. If it doesn’t, we want to insert the value 50, and the same for the ```"Blue"``` string value.
    * To implement such behavior, we would write the code snippet below:
    ```rust
    use std::collections::HashMap;

    let mut scores = HashMap::new();
    scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);

    scores.entry(String::from("Yellow")).or_insert(50);
    scores.entry(String::from("Blue")).or_insert(50);

    println!("{:?}", scores);
    ```
    * The ```or_insert``` method on ```Entry``` is defined to return a mutable reference to the value for the corresponding ```Entry``` key if that key exists, and if not, inserts the parameter as the new value for this key and returns a mutable reference to the new value.
  
  3. __Updating a Value Based on the Old Value__
    * The last use case for hash maps is to look up a key’s value and then update it based on the old value.
    * A common real scenario for this use case is the following: We want to count how many times each word appears in some text.
    * The following code snippet is suitable for this use case:
    ```rust
    use std::collections::HashMap;

    let text = "hello world wonderful world";
    let mut map = HashMap::new();

    for word in text.split_whitespace() {
        let count = map.entry(word).or_insert(0);
        *count += 1;
    }
    println!("{:?}", map);
    ```
    * A few notes about the code above:
      * The ```split_whitespace``` method returns an iterator over sub-slices, separated by whitespace, of the value in ```text```.
      * The ```or_insert``` method returns a mutable reference (```&mut V```) to the value for the specified key.
      * Here we store that mutable reference in the ```count``` variable, so in order to assign to that value, we must first dereference ```count``` using the asterisk (```*```).
      * Such mutable reference goes out of scope at the end of the ```for``` loop, so all of these changes are safe and allowed by the borrowing rules.
